---
layout: post
title: Handsaws
date: 2016-01-24T10:43:05-06:00
---

On Wednesday January 20, 2016 I attended my local Woodworkers Guild meeting.  The subject of the night was cutting dovetails, both by machine and by hand.  The demos provided some great insight into both methods.  I even got a chance to show the technique I use.  After the demos, interested guild members were discussing different issues and topics.  One of those topics was around handsaws.  I recently went through a discovery phase into the specifics of different handsaws.  What follows are my findings and opinions for new handsaws.  It is possible to find quality vintage handsaws.  Hope you find the info useful.

1)  [Lie-Nielsen Tapered saws](https://www.lie-nielsen.com/nodes/4168/tapered-saws).  These are what I had last night.  I have the tapered dovetail and carcass saw.  The tapered saw blade helps to ensure you don't cut past your base line on the back side of the work piece.  I love these saws.  I can't say enough good things about them.  For a brand new saw, I feel these are priced very competitively.

2)  [Gramercy Tools 9" Dovetail saw](https://www.toolsforworkingwood.com/store/dept/CGT/item/GT-DSAW9.XX).  I've always admired this saw.  Its similar to what Dicks modified saw was last night.  This saw has 19 points per inch (ppi), which is just crazy.  That is nice for getting the cut started, but cuts slower the rest of the way down.  Expensive.

3) [Rob Cosman's Dovetail saws](http://robcosman.com/tools_dtsaw.php).  Also expensive, 100% hand made, but getting a lot of attention.  I would love to try one of these saws, only for the reason to see if it holds up to all the hype and selling points.  It has a progressive filed saw plate.  That means at the tip its like 19ppi, to help you get the saw started.  But then the back of the saw is more like the Lie-Nielsen's at 14ppi to cut faster.  I'm not totally sold on the progressive filed idea, but it sells him a lot of saws.  The characteristic I like about these saws is the weight.  The handle is made from some sort of resin composite, which increases the weight of the saw.  The idea there is that the extra weight aids you in establishing the muscle memory for when the saw is vertical or not.  Its a sawing training tactic.  Again, I don't know.


4) [Bad Axe Tool Works 10" Dovetail Saw](http://www.badaxetoolworks.com/10-inch-dovetail-back-saw.php).  This is the saw I wish I knew about before I bought the Lie-Nielsens.  They are expensive, but also a line of saws getting a lot of attention lately.  Best of all, you support a local Wisconsin based company.  They are out of LaCrosse.  I have one of their Sash saws.  These are also hand made, and are a wonderful saw to use.  If anything, just read the info on their site.  You'll learn so much about what all the terms mean (hang angle, pitch, fleam, rake).  I think back when I was looking at saws, if I had known about Bad Axe Tools, I might have broke for one of these, instead of two Lie-Nielsens.  Only my opinion.

5) [Veritas Dovetail & Crosscut Saws](http://www.leevalley.com/US/Wood/page.aspx?p=64007&cat=1,42884,68511&ap=1).  The best thing about these saws is the price.  I have the dovetail saw.  But for me, thats where the benefits of this saw stops.  Its the saw I started with.  I'm not really sure what it is about this saw and why I have such a tough time with it, but it struggles through the cut.  I have tried going back to the saw now that I have more of an idea what I'm doing, and similar result.  I just struggle with it.  Again, this is only my opinion, and is probably more about the way I work, my expectations, and my sawing technique.  There are plenty of success stories out there for this saw.  I'm just not one of them.  I included it here for completeness.  If we were talking about Veritas hand planes, well, thats a different story.  I love their hand planes.

6) [Knew Concepts Aluminum Fret Saw Frames](http://www.leevalley.com/US/wood/page.aspx?p=69090&cat=1,42884,42902).  Not a dovetail saw, but I had a couple people ask me about it, so I thought I'd include a link to it.  Again, I looked at and tried several coping saws, and struggled with them.  I dropped the $95 dollars for the 5" and never looked back.  I absolutely love this saw.  It cuts so straight with very little intervention from me.  If you get one, include a pack of the #7 set of replacement blades.  There are 12 to a bag.  You don't want to break a blade and not have a replacement for it.  Although, I've had this saw for over a year, cut plenty of dovetails, and I'm still on the original blade.  That was the original blade I was using last night.  Can't say enough good things about this saw.

Thats all I have.  I hope this helps somebody thats maybe looking into saws.  Once I moved to a good quality saw, I started having more success with cutting good dovetails.  If this kind of info helps, let me know.  I've done this same type of discovery with other tools as well.  I'm not an expert, I just share what I've learned.

