---
layout: post
title: Sawlapalooza Day Two
date: 2016-07-19T10:43:05-06:00
---

After day one, what was day two going to bring?  Well, it brought a lot of
angles.  Saw plate and saw bench angles.  Lets dive in.

I started off the day learning about the important factors of a toothline.
First, how do you identify the toe and heel of a saw plate?  Its an important
distinction that you need to be aware of.  Knowing the difference, and how to
identify between the two plays a part when you are filing.  The toe is with the
rake, the heel is against the rake (or towards the direction of cut).  Now that
you can identify the toe and heel of a saw plate, you can't mess up the
direction you point your file tip when you are sharpening.  You always point
the tip of the file towards the heel, no matter what side of the plate you are
filing on.  Then it was onto dry firing.  Mark descends from 28 years in the
Army.  His military background is present in everything he does.  I loved it.
Dry firing is his way to describe getting use to holding a file properly in a
toothline.  You gain a feel for seating the file at the bottom of the gullet.
Build your line of sight on the angle of the file at 5 degrees to the tooth.
Then move to the next gullet.  We did this exercise up and down the saw plate.
Once we walked the entire length of one side, we'd flip the plate in the vise,
and walk the plate from the other side.  Always pointing the tip of the file
towards the heel at 5 degrees.  I must have done 10 passes like this without
ever pushing the file through the gullet.  Its the basics.  Mark says, do them
and do them well.  Commit to excellence.  My confidence was on the rise.  Not
so hard.  It got easier and easier.  "Now push the file", Mark says.  And I
did.  The relationship you were building with the file and the saw plate just
changed.  Its one thing to pick the file up and seat it firmly in the next
gullet, its another thing to start pushing it through.  Its at this point there
are many things happening.  You really need to take your time, and assess each
push of the file.  This process becomes very revealing.  Its easy to see that
maybe you are not seating the file all the way into the gullet.  If done
properly and accurately you'll see a facet form from the gullet all the way
up the tooth to the tip.  Practice, practice, practice.

After lunch the teams flipped sides.  Saw bench build continued.  Yesterday
went well for me, and I was sure today was going to go equally well.  It did,
partially.  It was time to cut the top half laps on the legs for the saw bench
top to sit into.  If you've seen Tom's saw bench design, you know that one set
of legs are splayed out at 100 degrees.  Great, more angles.  Having only spent
a couple of years in the hand tool world I know my craftsmanship isn't where I
would like it to be.  At least compared to others in the class.  Sawlapalooza
had some pretty talented people on the shop floor.  I've developed a habit of
accounting for my inevitable mess up with a saw or chisel.  I make a lot of
marks on my parts; arrows, numbers, triangles, you name it.  It helps me to
ensure the orientation and placement of those parts go back together the same
way I marked, matched, and cut them.  That way I only have to be sure that the
complimenting parts total out to 100 degrees.  I worked through it, but it was
slow going.  I was really getting into my head.  At one time Tom approached me
and asked how I was doing.  I think he may have been getting the sense that I
was struggling.  I told him I was thinking.  He nodded and looked on awaiting
my next move.  In my head I was trying to think through if I was about to
scribe a piece with my marking gauge correctly.  I stood there, probably with a
dumb founded look on my face like it was the first time I've seen a marking
gauge come in contact with a piece of wood expecting something to magically
happen.  "Just scribe the line", Tom said.  The confidence he carried in his
voice was enough for the both of us.  I scribed the line.  With an approving
nod of his head, the master walked away.  Its ok if you screw up.  You learn
from your mistakes.  Do them, assess, if you need to change course do it, then
move on.  And so I did.

The format of the class, both woodworking and saw sharpening, revealed to me
that I have some areas that need some attention. Thats why we turn towards
others for help and guidance.  To sharpening a saw correctly takes time.  Be
patient, you'll get it.  The woodworking side did the same.  While others
finished with time to spare, I have homework.

